---
title: "References"
weight: 50
description: More detailled information on some topics.
---

## Important information on types

### YAML, JSON, ENV and INI type extensions

SOPS uses the file extension to decide which encryption method to use on
the file content. `YAML`, `JSON`, `ENV`, and `INI` files are treated as
trees of data, and key/values are extracted from the files to only
encrypt the leaf values. The tree structure is also used to check the
integrity of the file.

Therefore, if a file is encrypted using a specific format, it needs to
be decrypted in the same format. The easiest way to achieve this is to
conserve the original file extension after encrypting a file. For
example:

``` sh
$ sops encrypt -i myfile.json
$ sops decrypt myfile.json
```

If you want to change the extension of the file once encrypted, you need
to provide `sops` with the `--input-type` flag upon decryption. For
example:

``` sh
$ sops encrypt myfile.json > myfile.json.enc

$ sops decrypt --input-type json myfile.json.enc
```

When operating on stdin, use the `--input-type` and `--output-type`
flags as follows:

``` sh
$ cat myfile.json | sops decrypt --input-type json --output-type json
```

### JSON and JSON_binary indentation

SOPS indents `JSON` files by default using one `tab`. However, you can
change this default behaviour to use `spaces` by either using the
additional `--indent=2` CLI option or by configuring `.sops.yaml` with
the code below.

The special value `0` disables indentation, and `-1` uses a single tab.

``` yaml
stores:
    json:
        indent: 2
    json_binary:
        indent: 2
```

### YAML indentation

SOPS indents `YAML` files by default using 4 spaces. However, you can
change this default behaviour by either using the additional
`--indent=2` CLI option or by configuring `.sops.yaml` with:

``` yaml
stores:
    yaml:
        indent: 2
```

> 📝 **Note**
>
> The YAML emitter used by sops only supports values between 2 and 9. If
> you specify 1, or 10 and larger, the indent will be 2.

### YAML anchors

SOPS only supports a subset of `YAML`\'s many types. Encrypting YAML
files that contain strings, numbers and booleans will work fine, but
files that contain anchors will not work, because the anchors redefine
the structure of the file at load time.

This file will not work in SOPS:

``` yaml
bill-to:  &id001
    street: |
        123 Tornado Alley
        Suite 16
    city:   East Centerville
    state:  KS

ship-to:  *id001
```

SOPS uses the path to a value as additional data in the AEAD encryption,
and thus dynamic paths generated by anchors break the authentication
step.

JSON and TEXT file types do not support anchors and thus have no such
limitation.

### YAML Streams

`YAML` supports having more than one \"document\" in a single file,
while formats like `JSON` do not. SOPS is able to handle both. This
means the following multi-document will be encrypted as expected:

``` yaml-stream
---
data: foo
---
data: bar
```

Note that the `sops` metadata, i.e. the hash, etc, is computed for the
physical file rather than each internal \"document\".

### Top-level arrays

`YAML` and `JSON` top-level arrays are not supported, because SOPS needs
a top-level `sops` key to store its metadata.

This file will not work in SOPS:

``` yaml
---
  - some
  - array
  - elements
```

But this one will work because the `sops` key can be added at the same
level as the `data` key.

``` yaml
data:
    - some
    - array
    - elements
```

Similarly, with `JSON` arrays, this document will not work:

``` json
[
  "some",
  "array",
  "elements"
]
```

But this one will work just fine:

``` json
{
  "data": [
    "some",
    "array",
    "elements"
  ]
}
```

## Config file format

This section describes the format of the SOPS config file.
The file must be named `.sops.yaml` (not `.sops.yml`!),
and SOPS will look for it in the current working directory and its parents,
using the first `.sops.yaml` file found.

A specific file can be set as the config file by passing the `--config` global option
or setting the `SOPS_CONFIG` environment variable.

The config file must be in the [YAML format](https://yaml.org/).

The following top-level keys are supported:

* `creation_rules`: a list of creation rule objects.
* `destination_rules`: a list of destination rule objects.
* `stores`: configuration object for the stores.

The following subsections describe how these properties are used.

### Creation rule object

A creation rule object has three types of keys:

1. Keys that determine whether the creation rule matches.
1. Keys that determine the (groups of) identities (keys) to encrypt with.
1. Keys that determine which parts of and how a file is encrypted.

#### Matching

The keys related to file matching are:

* `path_regex`: a regular expression matching files to encrypt.
  If not specified, this creation rule will match all files.

#### Identities

One can either directly specify identities for a single key group, or specify a list of key groups.
If a list of key groups is given, the individual settings are ignored.

To directly specify a single key group, you can use the following keys:

* `kms` (comma-separated string, or list of strings): list of AWS master keys.
* `aws_profile` (string): AWS profile to use for the AWS KMS keys.
  Example:

  ``` yaml
  creation_rules:
    - kms:
        - arn:aws:kms:us-east-1:656532927350:key/920aff2e-c5f1-4040-943a-047fa387b27e
        - arn:aws:kms:ap-southeast-1:656532927350:key/9006a8aa-0fa6-4c14-930e-a2dfb916de1d
      aws_profile: foo
  ```

* `age` (comma-separated string, or list of strings): list of Age public keys.
  Example:

  ``` yaml
  creation_rules:
    - age:
        - age1s3cqcks5genc6ru8chl0hkkd04zmxvczsvdxq99ekffe4gmvjpzsedk23c
        - age1qe5lxzzeppw5k79vxn3872272sgy224g2nzqlzy3uljs84say3yqgvd0sw
  ```

* `pgp` (comma-separated string, or list of strings): list of PGP/GPG key fingerprints.
  Example:

  ``` yaml
  creation_rules:
    - pgp:
        - 85D77543B3D624B63CEA9E6DBC17301B491B3F21!
        - E60892BB9BD89A69F759A1A0A3D652173B763E8F!
  ```

* `gcp_kms` (comma-separated string, or list of strings): list of GCP KMS ResourceIDs.
  Example:

  ``` yaml
  creation_rules:
    - gcp_kms:
        - projects/mygcproject/locations/global/keyRings/mykeyring/cryptoKeys/thekey
  ```

* `azure_keyvault` (comma-separated string, or list of strings): list of Azure Key Vault resource identifiers.
  Example:

  ``` yaml
  creation_rules:
    - azure_keyvault:
        - https://vault.url/keys/key-name/key-version  # Key with version
        - https://vault.url/keys/key-name/             # key without version, the latest will be used
  ```

* `hc_vault_transit_uri` (comma-separated string, or list of strings): list of HashiCorp Vault transit URIs.
  Example:

  ``` yaml
  creation_rules:
    - hc_vault_transit_uri:
        - http://my.vault/v1/sops/keys/secondkey
  ```

* `hckms` (list of strings): list of HuaweiCloud KMS key IDs (format: `<region>:<key-uuid>`).
  Example:

  ``` yaml
  creation_rules:
    - hckms:
        - tr-west-1:abc12345-6789-0123-4567-890123456789
        - tr-west-1:def67890-1234-5678-9012-345678901234
  ```

To specify a list of key groups, you can use the following key:

* `key_groups` (list of key group objects): a list of key group objects.
  See below for how such a resource should be represented.
  Example:

  ``` yaml
  creation_rules:
    - key_groups:
        - kms:
            - arn:aws:kms:us-east-1:656532927350:key/920aff2e-c5f1-4040-943a-047fa387b27e
            - arn:aws:kms:ap-southeast-1:656532927350:key/9006a8aa-0fa6-4c14-930e-a2dfb916de1d
          aws_profile: foo
          age:
            - age1s3cqcks5genc6ru8chl0hkkd04zmxvczsvdxq99ekffe4gmvjpzsedk23c
            - age1qe5lxzzeppw5k79vxn3872272sgy224g2nzqlzy3uljs84say3yqgvd0sw
          pgp:
            - 85D77543B3D624B63CEA9E6DBC17301B491B3F21!
            - E60892BB9BD89A69F759A1A0A3D652173B763E8F!
          gcp_kms:
            - projects/mygcproject/locations/global/keyRings/mykeyring/cryptoKeys/thekey
          azure_keyvault:
            - https://vault.url/keys/key-name/key-version  # Key with version
            - https://vault.url/keys/key-name/             # key without version, the latest will be used
          hc_vault_transit_uri:
            - http://my.vault/v1/sops/keys/secondkey
          hckms:
            - tr-west-1:abc12345-6789-0123-4567-890123456789

          merge:
            - pgp:
                - 85D77543B3D624B63CEA9E6DBC17301B491B3F21!
            - age:
                - age1s3cqcks5genc6ru8chl0hkkd04zmxvczsvdxq99ekffe4gmvjpzsedk23c
            - gcp_kms:
                - projects/mygcproject/locations/global/keyRings/mykeyring/cryptoKeys/thekey
              azure_keyvault:
                - https://vault.url/keys/key-name/key-version
  ```

### Key group object

A key group contains multiple identities (keys), similar to a creation rule object.
Having more than one key group allows for the use of [Shamir's secret sharing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shamir%27s_secret_sharing)
which splits the file's encryption key up into multiple parts,
requiring more than one identity to access the file.

A key group supports the following keys:

* `kms` (list of objects): list of AWS master keys.
  Every object must have the following keys:

  * `arn` (string): the ARN of the master key.

  * `role` (string, can be omitted): the key's role.

  * `context` (object mapping strings to strings): the key's encryption context.

  * `aws_profile` (string): the AWS profile.

  Example:

  ``` yaml
  - arn: arn:aws:kms:us-west-2:927034868273:key/fe86dd69-4132-404c-ab86-4269956b4500
    role: arn:aws:iam::927034868273:role/sops-dev-xyz
    context:
      Environment: production
      Role: web-server
    aws_profile: foo
  ```

* `gcp_kms` (list of objects): list of GCP KMS resource IDs.
  Every object must have the following key:

  * `resource_id` (string): the resource ID.

  Example:

  ``` yaml
  - resource_id: projects/mygcproject/locations/global/keyRings/mykeyring/cryptoKeys/thekey
  ```

* `azure_keyvault`` (list of objects): list of Azure Key Vault resource identifiers.
  Every object must have the following keys:

  * `vaultUrl` (string): the vault URL.

  * `key` (string): the key name.

  * `version` (string, can be empty): the version of the key to use.
    If empty, the latest key will be used on encryption.

  Example:

  ``` yaml
  - vaultUrl: https://vault.url
    key: key-name
    version: key-version
  - vaultUrl: https://vault.url
    key: key-name
    version: ""
  ```

* `hc_vault` (list of strings): list of HashiCorp Vault transit URIs.

* `hckms` (list of objects): list of HuaweiCloud KMS key IDs.
  Every object must have the following key:

  * `key_id` (string): the key ID in format `<region>:<key-uuid>`.

  Example:

  ``` yaml
  - key_id: tr-west-1:abc12345-6789-0123-4567-890123456789
  ```

* `age` (list of strings): list of Age public keys.

* `pgp` (list of strings): list of PGP/GPG key fingerprints.

* `merge`: a list of key group objects.
  These will be merged (by concatenating the keys of the same type) into this key group.
  This property allows for the concatenation of key groups using YAML anchors, aliases, and overrides.

#### Settings

The following keys configure encryption settings:

* `shamir_threshold` (integer, default `0`): Must be `0` (disabled) or an integer greater or equal to 2.
  Determines the number of key groups that must be present each to decrypt the file's key.

* `mac_only_encrypted` (boolean, default `false`): If set to `true`, only encrypted strings will count towards the file's MAC.
  If set to `false`, unencrypted values will also be part of the MAC computation.

The following keys configure the specific values in a file that should be encrypted.
Note that at most, one of these keys can be used.

* `unencrypted_suffix` (string): A value is encrypted if its key **does not** end with this suffix.
  All other values are **encrypted**.
  Comments are always encrypted.

* `encrypted_suffix` (string): A value is encrypted if its key **does** end with this suffix.
  All other values are **not encrypted**.
  Comments are always encrypted.

* `unencrypted_regex` (string): A value is encrypted if its key **does not match** this regular expression.
  All other values are **encrypted**.
  Comments are always encrypted.

* `encrypted_regex` (string): A value is encrypted if its key **matches** this regular expression.
  All other values are **not encrypted**.
  Comments are always encrypted.

* `unencrypted_comment_regex` (string): A value or comment is not encrypted if it has a preceding comment
  (or a trailing comment on the same line) matching this regular expression.
  All other values and comments are encrypted.

* `encrypted_comment_regex` (string): A value or comment is encrypted if it has a preceding comment
  (or a trailing comment on the same line) matching this regular expression.
  All other comments and values are not encrypted.
  The matching comment itself is not encrypted.

### Destination rule object

Not yet documented.

<!--
 TODO!
 type destinationRule struct {
     PathRegex        string       `yaml:"path_regex"`
     S3Bucket         string       `yaml:"s3_bucket"`
     S3Prefix         string       `yaml:"s3_prefix"`
     GCSBucket        string       `yaml:"gcs_bucket"`
     GCSPrefix        string       `yaml:"gcs_prefix"`
     VaultPath        string       `yaml:"vault_path"`
     VaultAddress     string       `yaml:"vault_address"`
     VaultKVMountName string       `yaml:"vault_kv_mount_name"`
     VaultKVVersion   int          `yaml:"vault_kv_version"`
     RecreationRule   creationRule `yaml:"recreation_rule,omitempty"`
     OmitExtensions   bool         `yaml:"omit_extensions"`
 } -->

### Stores configuration object

The store configuration object can have the following keys:

* `dotenv`: this is an object. Right now no keys are supported.

* `ini`: this is an object. Right now no keys are supported.

* `json_binary`: this is an object, supporting the following keys:

  * `indent` (integer; default `-1`): the indentation to use in number of spaces.
    `0` means no indentation (everything will be in one line),
    and `-1` means indentation by a single tabulator character.

* `json`: this is an object, supporting the following keys:

  * `indent` (integer; default `-1`): the indentation to use in number of spaces.
    `0` means no indentation (everything will be in one line),
    and `-1` means indentation by a single tabulator character.

* `yaml`: this is an object, supporting the following keys:

  * `indent` (integer; default `4`): the indentation to use in number of spaces.
    The YAML emitter used by sops only supports values between `2` and `9`.
    If you specify `1`, or `10` and larger, the indent will be `2`.

## Encryption Protocol

When SOPS creates a file, it generates a random 256 bit data key and
asks each KMS and PGP master key to encrypt the data key. The encrypted
version of the data key is stored in the `sops` metadata under
`sops.kms` and `sops.pgp`.

For KMS:

``` yaml
sops:
    kms:
        - enc: CiC6yCOtzsnFhkfdIslYZ0bAf//gYLYCmIu87B3sy/5yYxKnAQEBAQB4usgjrc7JxYZH3SLJWGdGwH//4GC2ApiLvOwd7Mv+cmMAAAB+MHwGCSqGSIb3DQEHBqBvMG0CAQAwaAYJKoZIhvcNAQcBMB4GCWCGSAFlAwQBLjARBAyGdRODuYMHbA8Ozj8CARCAO7opMolPJUmBXd39Zlp0L2H9fzMKidHm1vvaF6nNFq0ClRY7FlIZmTm4JfnOebPseffiXFn9tG8cq7oi
          enc_ts: 1439568549.245995
          arn: arn:aws:kms:us-east-1:656532927350:key/920aff2e-c5f1-4040-943a-047fa387b27e
```

For PGP:

``` yaml
sops:
    pgp:
        - fp: 85D77543B3D624B63CEA9E6DBC17301B491B3F21
          created_at: 1441570391.930042
          enc: |
              -----BEGIN PGP MESSAGE-----
              Version: GnuPG v1

              hQIMA0t4uZHfl9qgAQ//UvGAwGePyHuf2/zayWcloGaDs0MzI+zw6CmXvMRNPUsA
              pAgRKczJmDu4+XzN+cxX5Iq9xEWIbny9B5rOjwTXT3qcUYZ4Gkzbq4MWkjuPp/Iv
              qO4MJaYzoH5YxC4YORQ2LvzhA2YGsCzYnljmatGEUNg01yJ6r5mwFwDxl4Nc80Cn
              RwnHuGExK8j1jYJZu/juK1qRbuBOAuruIPPWVdFB845PA7waacG1IdUW3ZtBkOy3
              O0BIfG2ekRg0Nik6sTOhDUA+l2bewCcECI8FYCEjwHm9Sg5cxmP2V5m1mby+uKAm
              kewaoOyjbmV1Mh3iI1b/AQMr+/6ZE9MT2KnsoWosYamFyjxV5r1ZZM7cWKnOT+tu
              KOvGhTV1TeOfVpajNTNwtV/Oyh3mMLQ0F0HgCTqomQVqw5+sj7OWAASuD3CU/dyo
              pcmY5Qe0TNL1JsMNEH8LJDqSh+E0hsUxdY1ouVsg3ysf6mdM8ciWb3WRGxih1Vmf
              unfLy8Ly3V7ZIC8EHV8aLJqh32jIZV4i2zXIoO4ZBKrudKcECY1C2+zb/TziVAL8
              qyPe47q8gi1rIyEv5uirLZjgpP+JkDUgoMnzlX334FZ9pWtQMYW4Y67urAI4xUq6
              /q1zBAeHoeeeQK+YKDB7Ak/Y22YsiqQbNp2n4CKSKAE4erZLWVtDvSp+49SWmS/S
              XgGi+13MaXIp0ecPKyNTBjF+NOw/I3muyKr8EbDHrd2XgIT06QXqjYLsCb1TZ0zm
              xgXsOTY3b+ONQ2zjhcovanDp7/k77B+gFitLYKg4BLZsl7gJB12T8MQnpfSmRT4=
              =oJgS
              -----END PGP MESSAGE-----
```

SOPS then opens a text editor on the newly created file. The user adds
data to the file and saves it when done.

Upon save, SOPS browses the entire file as a key/value tree. Every time
SOPS encounters a leaf value (a value that does not have children), it
encrypts the value with AES256_GCM using the data key and a 256 bit
random initialization vector.

Each file uses a single data key to encrypt all values of a document,
but each value receives a unique initialization vector and has unique
authentication data.

Additional data is used to guarantee the integrity of the encrypted data
and of the tree structure: when encrypting the tree, key names are
concatenated into a byte string that is used as AEAD additional data
(aad) when encrypting values. We expect that keys do not carry sensitive
information, and keeping them in cleartext allows for better diff and
overall readability.

Any valid KMS or PGP master key can later decrypt the data key and
access the data.

Multiple master keys allow for sharing encrypted files without sharing
master keys, and provide a disaster recovery solution. The recommended
way to use SOPS is to have two KMS master keys in different regions and
one PGP public key with the private key stored offline. If, by any
chance, both KMS master keys are lost, you can always recover the
encrypted data using the PGP private key.

### Message Authentication Code

In addition to authenticating branches of the tree using keys as
additional data, SOPS computes a MAC on all the values to ensure that no
value has been added or removed fraudulently. The MAC is stored
encrypted with AES_GCM and the data key under tree -\> `sops` -\> `mac`.
This behavior can be modified using `--mac-only-encrypted` flag or
`.sops.yaml` config file which makes SOPS compute a MAC only over values
it encrypted and not all values.
